[Music]
heather heing brett weinstein welcome
back to the show previously apart now
together i'm super excited to have you
guys thank you tom for having us thanks
for having us glad to be back
dude the new book a hunter-gatherer's
guide to the 21st century i loved it uh
it is absolutely extraordinary and i
want to begin
with a quote from the book that is quite
ominous and then i want to see what you
guys have to say about this bad boy so
here we go this is literally a direct
quote from the book towards the end
but and i quote we are headed for
collapse civilization is becoming
incoherent around us
i'd love to know what you guys mean by
that and if that to you is a big part of
the thread through the book because it
was for me
well the first thing to say is that you
skipped the warning in the front of the
book that it should only be read while
sitting down so
fall over and injure themselves
um yeah well we are headed for collapse
that's really not even an extraordinary
claim if you just simply extrapolate out
from where we are we are outstripping
the planet's capacity to house us and we
don't appear to have a plan for shifting
gears so
it's really a factual statement now the
question really is why
and
the
the bitter pill is that the very thing
that made us so successful as a species
is now setting us up for disaster that
is to say our evolutionary capacity to
solve problems has
uh outstripped our capacity to adapt to
the new world that we've created for
ourselves and so we've become
psychologically and socially and
physiologically and politically
unhealthy and our civilization isn't any
better
that said if any species could get us
out of this mess it's us like you know
it's exactly as brett said
we are
the most labile the most adaptable the
most generalist species on the planet
and born with the most potential to
become anything else previously
unimagined so
i do feel like in the end the message of
the book which is explicitly and
consistently evolutionary in all of its
different instantiations
is
hopeful and yes that that quote that you
read is ominous and i think as brett
said you know factual statement but we
can do this we we have we have to do it
and uh we need to try
and in fact in evolutionary biology we
recognize something we call adaptive
peaks and adaptive valleys and it would
have to be true that to shift gears to
something much better something that
that
gave humans more of what it is that we
all value we would have to go through an
adaptive valley and it would look
frightening and in fact they are
dangerous places to be but it's part and
parcel of shifting from one mode of
existence to another
all right i think an idea that's going
to be really important to get across and
this is something as a guy that only
ever thought i would talk about business
and then in trying to explain how to get
good at business i kept having to come
back to mindset and then trying to
explain mindset i keep having to go to
evolution it's like that we're having a
biological experience that your brain is
an organ it comes
you guys said that we are not a blank
slate but we are the blankest of slates
which i think is a phenomenal way to put
this idea
and i want to tie that to the title and
get your guys take so it's a
hunter-gatherer's guide to the 21st
century and so the way that i take that
is that notion you have to understand
that you're a product of evolution that
your brain is a product of evolution and
then once you understand the forces of
evolution and how we got here then maybe
just maybe we can find our way out of it
so
what are the key elements to being a
product of evolution that you think
people miss
that we must understand if we're going
to navigate our way well out of this
valley of evolution
let me say first that the the title a
hunter-gatherer's guide to the 21st
century
uh evokes that sort of romanticized
hunter-gatherer on the african savannah
of the paleolithic which of course is a
part of our human history and does have
many lessons in it to teach us about who
we are now and who we can become
but as we say in the book
we are all parts of our history like we
are not just hunter-gatherers we are
also right now post-industrialists and
there are evolutionary implications of
that go a little farther back a lot
farther back depending on your framing
and we are agriculturalists go farther
back we're hunter-gatherers go farther
back with primates where mammals were
fish all of these moments of our
evolutionary history
have left their mark in us and have
something to teach us about both what
our capacities are and what our
weaknesses are and what we can do going
forward and i would add
the lessons from evolution
are both good and bad here
one thing that
we realized that our students over the
course of many years of teaching this
material
realized was that everything about our
experience as human beings is shaped by
our evolutionary nature
and that has a very disturbing upshot
because
we are fantastic creatures with an
utterly mundane mission the very same
mission that every other evolved
creature has to lodge its genes in the
future
and that this actually
explains the nature not only of our
physical beings but of our culture and
our perception of the world so
understanding that all of that marvelous
architecture is built for an utterly
mind-numbing purpose is an important
first step in seeing where to go but the
other thing to realize and you
referenced our our assertion that we are
the blankest slate that has ever existed
or has ever been produced by evolution
and what this means is that we actually
have an arbitrary map of what we can
change that to the extent that our
genomes have offloaded much of the
evolutionary adaptive work to the
software layer that means we are
actually capable of changing that layer
because that layer is built for change
but not everything exists in that layer
so some things about what we are are
very difficult to change some things are
actually trivial easily changed and
knowing which is which is a matter of
sorting out where the information is
housed but it's all there for the same
reason it's exactly it's all there for
the same reason it's all evolutionary be
it genetic or cultural or anything else
can you guys give us an example of and i
found this very provocative in the book
and it certainly rings true to me but
that to say that we are in some ways
fish from an evolutionary standpoint
that we are you know in some ways
primates from an evolutionary standpoint
what does that mean exactly again it's a
factual claim one that once you've seen
the picture standing from the right
place is uncontroversial when we say
you know is a platypus warm-blooded we
are not asking a question about its
phylogeny right we're asking about how
it works right
when we ask is a whale a mammal we are
asking a question about phylogeny so
when we ask the question
are humans fish if we're asking a
functional question then maybe not
but if we're actually asking a question
akin to
is a mouse a mammal right
then we are asking a question about the
evolutionary relatedness of that
creature to everything else and the key
thing you need to understand is that a
group a good evolutionary group like
mammal or primate
or ape
is a group that if you imagine the tree
of life
falls from the tree of life with a
single clip right if you clip the tree
of life at a particular place all of the
apes fall together if you clip it lower
down all of the primates fall together
and the claim that we are fish is a
simple matter of if we agree that a
shark is a fish and we agree that a
guppy is a fish
if you clip the tree of life such that
you capture those two
uh species you will inherently capture
all the tetrapods which is to say
creatures
like us
um so we are fish as a factual matter if
the question is one of evolutionary
relatedness so let me um
if i may just say um say that in in
slightly different words
there are at least two main ways to be
similar right you can be similar because
you have shared history and you can be
similar because you've converged on some
solution and so dragonflies and swans
both fly not because the most recent
common ancestor of dragonflies and swans
flew but because in each of their
environments flight was an adaptive
response
and
that means that flying flyingness is not
a phylogenetic it's not a historical
representation of what those two things
are whereas if you say well
both both whales and humans lactate in
order to feed their babies
that is a description of
of something that they both inherited
from a shared ancestor right so the
earliest mammal lactated to feed its
young
if any any organism on the planet today
that is descendant of that first mammal
that lactated to to feed its young is a
mammal even if
some future mammal went a different way
and lost the ability to lactate it would
still be a mammal so you know brett
mentioned tetrapods uh tetrapods came
you know with the fish that came out
onto land with you know four feet and
started moving around and it's the
amphibians and the reptiles and the
birds and the mammals
but snakes are tetrapods not because
they still have four feet because they
don't but because they're a member of
those that group so it's it's a
historical description of group
membership as opposed to like an
ecological description of what we're
doing so we're not aquatic like most
fish are but we're fish because we
belong to a group that includes all the
fish now i'm gonna say why i think that
matters and why i think you guys put
that at the beginning of a book that
sort of has this punch line of like hey
we're really headed towards disaster and
we have to be very thoughtful and here
are some solutions
so
the reason why in business you end up
having to talk about evolution is
because i need a business owner to
understand you cannot trust your
impulses because your impulses may not
have the growth of your business in mind
it may not reflect an understanding of
consumer behavior it may simply be
something from our evolutionary past
that was like
akin to
it's better to jump away from the garden
hose
thinking that it might be a snake than
it is to think that it might be a garden
hose and it really is a snake and once
you understand okay my mind is
structured in a certain way it has these
insane biases it tends me towards
certain things like the one that bothers
me the absolute most
is that when people have a feeling it
feels so real it and you never translate
it into logic so you're like that thing
makes me angry therefore it is bad and
it must be attacked assailed whatever
and if you run a business like that if
you cannot divorce yourself from i have
an impulse stop that insert conscious
control and then figure out sort of what
the first principles logical buildup is
you can't solve a novel problem and
until you can solve a novel problem in
an environment that changes as rapidly
as our current world you guys call it
hyper novelty if i remember correctly
you you get into these crazy making
scenarios and so
while
it seems almost absurd to say that in
some way we are fish
the the key point that i take away from
your book and that just seems so
powerful to recognize to me is that
you have to understand that you
it wasn't a perfect construction at
least not towards modern goals
does that make sense to you guys
absolutely absolutely now there are um
there are really two upshots to this
claim that you are a fish right it's
very hard for people to wrap their minds
around it the first time but once you
realize that this is what we mean when
we say uh you know a whale is a mammal
that we are making a claim about the
tree of life
then you can actually teach yourself how
adaptive evolution works just by simply
recognizing that snakes are the most
specious clade of legless lizards snakes
are lizards right you don't think of it
that way but they are
seals are bears that have returned to
the sea right so once you understand
that all you have to do is say actually
this is a that it's unambiguous and that
means
that adaptive evolution is the kind of
process that can turn a bear into an
aquatic uh creature like a seal right so
that's foreign right or a lizard into a
snake
the other thing that you mention and
you're right on the money which is that
if you use your intuitive
honed instincts in order to sort through
novel problems you will constantly upend
yourself because those instincts aren't
built with those problems in mind now
the thing that's special for us humans
is that we have an alternative and the
alternative we argue in the second to
last chapter of the book
is consciousness that the correct tool
for approaching novel problems is to
promote whatever the underlying issue is
to consciousness to share it between
individuals who likely have different
experience we'll see different
components of it clearly and to come to
an emergent understanding of what the
meaning of the problem is and what the
most likely useful solution may be so in
some sense really what you're saying is
in this context you're trying to get
people to get into their conscious mind
and process this as a team activity
rather than go with their gut which is
very likely wrong absolutely and you
know our capacity
as humans but that includes as a modern
human who is you know trying to engage
in business with people
to oscillate between this conscious
state
and a cultural state uh which is one in
which actually maybe change isn't
happening so rapidly maybe the rules
that we've got are good for the current
situation let's just do this let's do a
set and forget on this set of things
over here and not
not constantly renegotiate whereas in
this other part of the landscape we
actually do need to stay in our
conscious minds and yes we need to tamp
down the emotion and tamp down the you
know the quick gut response but engage
with one another
and recognize that you know it's not
satan on the other side of the
interaction it's another human being
with all the same kinds of strengths and
weaknesses as each of us has
yeah there's a really interesting thing
that happens when you have um a team
around you whether they're employees or
otherwise where
the ju literally just the other day i
said something to my team and several of
them misconstrued it and i could see
they were having a big emotional
response and i said okay
tell me your
objection in a single sentence with no
commas no run-ons no parentheticals and
what you find is that old einstein quote
of if you can't explain it simply you
probably don't understand it very well
and so people have this emotional
reaction but they and they then enact
out in the world that emotional reaction
but they don't actually stop to take the
time to be able to say it in a single
sentence and so you end up in what my my
wife and business partner and i call you
end up having to chase them because
you'll solve the they'll say here's my
problem you'll solve it say cool so if i
do something that addresses that and
they'll be like well it's not quite that
it's it's this and then you solve that
and they're like well it's not and it's
like when you force people to say
something really simply it forces them
to interpret
that emotion to bring it into the
conscious mind and then to actually deal
with it
which i find utterly fascinating do you
guys have a method by which you do that
in your own lives or that you've taught
other people to do it
yeah i would say there's a first go-to
move which is let's figure out what we
actually disagree about and very
frequently
you can cover
half the distance or more just simply by
separating an issue into two different
ones so for example if i talk to a
conservative audience
i know we're going to disagree about
climate change but i also know from
experience
that i can get a conservative audience
to agree
that if they believed that human
activity was causing substantial change
to the climate and that that was going
to destabilize systems on which we were
dependent that they would be
enthusiastic about doing something about
it and so what we really disagree about
is whether or not we are causing
something sufficient that we need to
take that action right that's half the
distance covered in a matter of just
simply dividing it into two puzzles and
you'd be amazed almost everything that
we have fierce disagreements about look
like this where you just sort of assume
the other side has every defect rather
than realizing we agree to a point at
which point we we differ yeah no and
this is um this is different from what
we were just talking about right with
regard to you know you're having an
emotional or an analytical response this
is a question of okay we think we're
talking about the same thing but
probably we are using the same words for
different categories in our yes
and can we can we figure out how many
subcategories there are and you know say
i've got five in my thing you've got
five but maybe there's only two that
overlap
so maybe we focus on those two but maybe
there's also maybe that you know the
devil in the details is in one of those
one of those other six that is only in
one of the people's brains and when it's
revealed to be like actually you think i
believe that thing and i don't like
that's not something we share between us
so yeah having the capability to go in
and like zoom in and out on problems and
say
actually the problem can be smaller than
you think and and also it is larger than
you think and then i think and let's
constantly
re-re-evaluate
the the framing and the scale at which
we're doing analysis
you guys talk in the book about theory
of mind and heather i know you've
either started writing have written or
have threatened to write a science
fiction novel which you know i
desperately want you to do and publish
but i've started doing a game when i
find myself in that situation where and
i learned this in my previous company
where
both of my partners were really smart
guys but every now and then we'd get in
an argument and
i'd be like i think they're an idiot but
i know they're not an idiot and they
think i'm an idiot but i'm not an idiot
and so i started approaching it as a
writer and saying okay if i were writing
this character in this scene what would
have to be true for them to be acting
this way what would they have to believe
be thinking whatever
and in my marriage this has become an
extraordinary tool of saying for you to
be reacting this way you would have to
think that i believe
xyz is that the issue and then by
getting to that what i call base
assumptions
you can really begin to facilitate that
you guys must have encountered this a
bazillion times with students
how do you
unearth that like what's the process of
of uncovering that especially in fact
it is
so weird to me that you two have become
like the most attacked people on planet
earth i i will never quite understand
how this has happened but
how do you guys
tease out and not just go ah they're
evil how do you find those underlying
issues well first of all i think we're
we're attacked because we we look like
villains
so much so right exactly um
well you you hinted an important
issue here that i think is actually
quite modern so if you lived any sort of
normal existence from
an ancestor you know even just a couple
hundred years before the present
you would find that they pretty much
grew up around the people that they
ended up interacting with as adults they
didn't stray very far from home
everything would be incredibly familiar
and the language that they used to
interact with everybody they were
encountering
would have been
shared because it would have been picked
up from an immediate group of ancestors
that they both knew right
when we use english to talk to someone
else
we have an incredibly blunt tool because
the ancestor from which we picked up
that shared language is quite distant
and what this does you know you really
have two kinds of people in the world
you've got people who more or less use
the tool like english as it was handed
to them
and they don't question it and you have
people who are trying to break new
ground and what is true for everybody
who breaks new ground is that they end
up building a personal toolkit they will
redefine words so that they become
sharper and more refined and more useful
and then when you put two such people
together they will talk right past each
other because they don't remember that
they redefined things so one thing that
is essential if you're going to team up
with someone else who's generative and
done their own work and arrived at some
interesting conclusion you need time
it's weeks of talking to each other
before you even understand how they use
language once you do that you can have
an incredible conversation but if you
think you're going to sit down with them
and immediately pool what you know and
get somewhere you've got another thing
coming because at first they're going to
sound like they don't know what they're
talking about right you've got to find
those definitions and figure out what
they mean and it's actually if once you
realize that this is the job it's very
pleasurable and it's it's really an
honor when somebody lets you look
through their eyes you say oh that's how
you see the world and now i get a chance
to see it that way and then let me show
you what i'm seeing and you really can
get somewhere but there's no shortcut
about the time necessary to learn each
other's language that's right and that
that really
is a parallel for what we were doing in
the classroom as well you know we didn't
you know if we if we were teaching 18
year olds we were teaching freshmen we
didn't assume that they all came in as
experts obviously um and yet the same
logic applies that everyone has you know
i i wouldn't say actually i i don't
think i really agree that you know
regardless of what language you're
speaking you either you know take it on
on faith as as you have received it or
you act
decisively to change it i think
teenagers tend to be modifying language
pretty actively and so especially when
you
you know find yourself in a room full of
you know relatively young people in a
college classroom you have a lot of
people who are using language
differently um than you the professor
does and then you're also in the
business of introducing to them
um you know a set of tools some of which
has specialized language associated with
it um associated with you know whatever
it is that you're teaching and
finding the common ground between these
like okay actually all of us modify
language some and let's figure out how
to use language that we can all agree on
and understand and
um you know for for the purposes of
communication as opposed to for the
purposes of displaying group membership
yeah because that's because that that's
what jargon is often is about group
membership displays and that's what um
you know memes and especially um well
a lot of them a lot of the very rapidly
changing language that doesn't happen in
technical space is really about
demonstrating that you're on the inside
of some some joke
well actually this is a perfect case uh
of a personal definition that must be
shared otherwise you can't talk right
because
uh i at least distinguish between terms
of art and jargon most people will use
the term jargon for both things but the
point is
terms of art are a necessary evil right
you have to add some special term
because the language that you're handed
the general language doesn't cover it
and so you need a special term to
describe some thing and that means that
somebody walking into the conversation
isn't necessarily aware of what's being
said until they've learned that term
jargon is the pathological version of
this jargon is the use of these
specially defined terms to exclude
people from a conversation that they
probably could understand and that they
might even realize you didn't know what
you were talking about if they could
understand the words that you were using
so you use those words to protect
yourself and um
until somebody gets that when you say
jargon you're not talking about
specialist language you're talking about
a
competitive strategy
um they won't know what you're saying so
and you know the difference as heather
points out is in a room full of 18 year
olds especially when you're the
professor at some level you can say look
here are the terms that we need in order
to have this conversation and more or
less people will adopt them because
that's the natural state of things
rather than two peers getting together
where you have to
you know my my rule is
i don't care whether the definition ends
up being the one that i came up with or
your set of definitions it doesn't
matter to me what i need is a term for
everything that needs to be
distinguished and we both need to know
what those terms are in order to have
the conversation but whose terms they
are doesn't matter well and yet um
you know as as i think we say in the
book our undergraduate advisor bob
trivers an extraordinary evolutionary
biologist when we were
leaving college and applying to grad
school he gave us a piece of advice
about what kinds of jobs we might
ultimately want if we were to stay in
academia and he said do not accept a job
in which you are not exposed to
undergraduates
because
teaching undergraduates means exposing
yourself and the thinking that you are
presenting to
to naive minds who will throw curveballs
at you and some of those curveballs are
going to be nuisances and maybe they'll
waste your time but some of them are
likely to reveal to you
the frailty in your own thinking or in
the thinking of the field and that is
the way the progress is made and so you
know whom we call peers is uh up for
discussion and recognizing that we can
we can all learn from almost every
person that we interact with uh is a
remarkable way forward
yeah and the corollary to that is
uh there's a lot of pressure not to
reveal what you don't know by asking
questions that will establish the the
boundaries of your knowledge and being
courageous about actually acknowledging
what you don't know often leads to the
best conversations right
you guys do talk about that in the book
and i think that this is such an
important idea i'd love to tie it to
something else you talk about which is
what is science like you guys have a
pretty unique take on what science is
that it could be done with a machete and
a pair of boots out in the jungle it can
be done in a laboratory
um
yeah what is science
science is a method for correcting for
bias
and that method is pretty well known it
has had a few updates along the way but
the the basic idea is it is a slightly
cumbersome mechanism for correcting for
human bias and the result is that it
produces a
set of models and a
a scope of knowledge that improves over
time and what improves means is
it explains more while assuming less
and and fits with all of the other
things that we think are true maximally
right ultimately uh
all true narratives must reconcile and
that includes the scientific narratives
that we tell at different scales right
the nanoscale has to fit with the
macroscopic scale even if we don't
understand how they fit together yet so
ultimately we're sort of filling in from
both sides what we understand and what
we expect is that they will
meet in the middle like a bridge and
if they don't it means we got something
wrong somewhere yeah so science is not
the methods of science
it's not the glassware and the expensive
instrumentation
and it's not the um
indicators uh that you're a scientist
because you're wearing these things you
know it's not the lab coat and it's not
the conclusions of science it's not the
things that we think we know many of
which things are actually true and some
of which aren't
science is the process
and all those other things are sort of
hallmarks that may or may not be
accurate proxies when you're trying to
figure out is that person doing science
is this science over here
but what science is is actually the
process
and it's worth saying that you don't
need it for realms that are not
counterintuitive right you don't need to
do science in order to figure out where
the desk chair is before you sit down
right it is apparent to you where the
desk chair is because you're built to
perceive it directly now every so often
we all have the experience of looking at
something and not being able to figure
out what we're seeing there's some
optical illusion the way we are sitting
where we are in relation to the object
we're looking at and then you will go
through a scientific process you know if
that is a so and so that also suggests
this and i can see that that's not true
so what could it be right that that
process is scientific but by and large
the direct perception of objects around
you because it is intuitive because it's
built to be intuitive your system is
built to understand it in a way that
makes it intuitive doesn't require this
so we need science where things are
sufficiently difficult to observe or
counter-intuitive so you need a process
to correct for your expectations
what drives all this to me and that gets
missed even though it's sitting in plain
sight is to make progress you must
hunger to know where you are wrong
and if you can derive and again i commit
everything from a business lens in
business if you can derive tremendous
pleasure and quite frankly self-esteem
from your willingness to seek out the
imperfections in your thinking you'll
actually make it
if you don't and it's an ego protective
game for you and your ego is built
around being right then you're you're
going under and to your point about
exposing yourself to undergrads some of
the most phenomenal like
incisive questions
challenging my leadership have come from
like interns who just they've never had
a job before and so they're like oh why
are we doing xyz and you're like why are
we doing that
and if in that moment you're like i must
you know present myself and have a
reason for why we are doing that
you actually talk yourself into
something
and because the market much like
evolution or reality which is something
i want definitely want to talk about how
there's a weirdness that we're living
through now where people feel like if
they can convince you through language
of something that it actually somehow
affects the underlying truth
but in business the market does not care
like you can convince your team that
you're right but if the market doesn't
embrace it you're going to fail and
there's something wonderful about that
well i want to i want to push back
slightly admittedly this is not an area
of expertise but it seems to me that
there are two things that business needs
to be divided into two things in order
to really understand what you're getting
at the business where the market is
actually
in a position to test your understanding
of what is true and what will work and
what people want and things like that is
one thing that's real business and then
there's a kind of rent seeking in which
it may be about
uh you know
a company
that
does not have a functional product that
is selling the idea that it will have a
product that no one else will have and
its stock price rises uh as a matter of
speculation that may well be a realm in
which
it is uh it is deception and in fact
this this is beyond the scope of the
book
but wherever perception is the mediator
of success you have
deception as an important evolutionary
force where
physics dictates whether you've
succeeded or failed you don't have that
problem you can't fool physics so
i don't know what the two words for the
two kinds of business are but the rent
seeking part of business and the
actual production of superior goods or
the same goods at a cheaper price
that's a different kind of business
structure well here's what's interesting
really fast on that point i think that
they do fall under the same category so
when i say that the market decides so if
your pitch is hey boys and girls we have
to deceive the market and we have to
you know game it and here's how we game
it and so everything is a function of
your goal so if your goal is to deceive
and to you know create a pump in your
stock price there is a way to do that
that will work and there is a way to do
that that won't work and now getting
into honorable goals versus you know
dishonorable goals that that is really
fascinating um but i think that they
they do fall into the same category of
either the thing you do moves you
towards your goals or it does not
yep i mean i still think there's room
for division because there is uh you
know the mythology of the market is that
it pays for value and rent seeking
violates that rent seeking effectively
is a failure of the market and so i
don't know i don't know where the
definitional split needs to be but it
does seem to me that although you're
right the the you know whether whether
what you are doing is uh assessing what
you believe the psychology of the market
to be or whether you are assessing what
might be physically possible in terms of
a product those are both real systems
that you are either correct about or not
but there does seem to me to be a
distinction between rent seeking and and
the production of actual value and
there's a perfect analogy to be made
to
academic science
of course and so in academia if you are
a scientist you are supposed to be
seeking an understanding of reality
but the way that modern science is done
uh involves a lot of requesting of
grants from most of the federal
government and
just as i imagine in business although
definitely not my area of expertise the
bigger you are the harder it is to
change course
and in academia in part that means the
later in your career you are the harder
it is to change course and therefore the
harder it's going to be to do something
like embrace that you were wrong
and
you know actual honorable good
scientists will always will always fess
up and talk publicly about when they
were wrong
but if your entire lab is contingent on
a model of the universe that is turning
out to look ever less likely it's going
to be much more difficult for you to do
that for you to embrace the wrongness of
you know what might be the livelihoods
of not just you but many of the people
who are working under you
how would you handle it
well you have to restructure things so
that
what actually matters is being right in
the long term what we have
is an epidemic of corruption inside of
science which has more or less been
spotted first
with respect to psychology now
psychology is difficult to do because
you're inherently looking into the mind
and you don't have a direct ability to
measure most of what's there
but the p hacking crisis
basically the abuse of statistics to
create the impression of discovery which
then resulted in the inability to
reproduce
a large fraction of the results in
psychology is actually the tip of a much
larger iceberg
that basically science as a process is
excellent but science as a social
environment is defective and especially
defective where we have plugged it very
directly into market incentives and
we've put
scientists at an unnatural level of
competition for a tiny number of jobs we
produce huge numbers of applicants which
means that the incentive to cheat
is tremendous and those who stick to the
rules probably don't succeed very well
so basically what we have is a
a race to discover who is best at
appearing scientific and delivering
those things that um that the field
wants to believe rather than those
things that the field needs to know so
the short answer to your question which
isn't especially operationalizable is
you need to put a firewall between
market forces
and the scientific endeavor because
although science is an incredibly
powerful process it is also a fragile
process that needs insulation from
market forces or it cannot work so i
would say just in brief again not
particularly operationalizable but um
reward public error correction
right you know no matter no matter what
stage you are and what the nature of the
error was
um unless there was
intentional fraud which of course does
exist
um public error correction should be
rewarded uh without shaming uh without
you know loss of of priority in other
things and the ability to do science
because not only do we need people to be
able to um see that they've made
mistakes and and actually course correct
but we need people to be taking enough
risks early on that they are likely to
sometimes make errors and so in the
current environment where any error it
can be considered like the death knell
for a career we have ever more timid
scientists and that is making us less
good at science as a society and in fact
it almost
seems implausible that people would go
around acknowledging their errors but it
wasn't so long ago that this was fairly
common in fact
i used to study
bats
and there's a famous example of this not
so long ago uh a guy named pettigrew had
advanced a radical hypothesis that
suggested that the old world fruit bats
the so-called flying foxes were in fact
not part of the same evolutionary
history as the bats that we see here in
the new world for example the microbats
he argued that they were in fact flying
primates
which was a fascinating argument
it was based on their neurobiology
looking more like
monkey neurobiology than it does like
bat neurobiology which turned out to be
the result of the fact that they used
their eyes rather than a collocation
so it was wrong and what he said at the
point that it was revealed by the genes
that he had been wrong was
if it is a wrong hypothesis it has been
a most fruitful wrong hypothesis which
was absolutely right the work that was
done to sort that out was tremendously
valuable and so anyway nobody who has
had to course correct and admit an error
finds it pleasant but
we have to restore the rules of the game
where
the longer you wait the worse it is so
that the incentive is as soon as you
know you're wrong owning up to it so
that you are on the right side of the
puzzle as quickly as possible that that
has to be the objective
as you guys look at society and where
we're at now so one problem you've
obviously just very eloquently laid out
you've got incentives around admitting
that you're wrong is uh it could be the
death knell of your career what else is
going on that makes you guys have that
um quote that we started the the episode
with around you know sort of the you
didn't use the word disintegrating but
that there's to put my own words to it
there's a crazy making
that's happening at the societal level
what
has led to that like what are three or
four factors that are causing that
breakdown
well um you know in part you know the
the bias that we have as evolutionary
biologists is that we see a failure to
understand what we are
as
producing
short-term reductionist metric-heavy
pseudo-quantitative answers to questions
that uh warrant a much more holistic and
emergent approach
and so what are some of the the things
that modern humans have embraced or have
been told to embrace and some of us have
and some of us haven't um that have
helped produce
uh problems for for modern people
uh this is not this is not new with us
but um the ubiquity of screens
the change in parenting styles to
protect children from risk and
unstructured play
and the drugging of children legally
with anti-anxiety and anti-depression
meds more likely if they're girls and
the speed if they're boys
those three things in combination all of
which were sort of on the rise in the
90s and hit fever pitch in the in the
odds and early teens
helped reduce a generation that became
in body adults
but with minds that had not had a chance
yet
to actually
learn what it is to be human
and some of that is reversible and you
know really we just by by chance we were
college professors
we were college professors for basically
the entire period of time um during
which millennials were in college so we
taught millennials from from beginning
to end and almost to a person our
students were amazing and receptive and
creative and um and capable
and if
you
you know when when we talk about the
generation of millennials it's those
people who were drugged and screened and
helicopter and snowplow parented right
so
with individual attention people can be
pulled out of the tailspin but as a
societal level that's exactly what we're
in as a tailspin what is the tailspin
exactly though what is it about those
things that
what does it create in people
i want to address that as part of a
a slight reorientation of the question
so
one of the things that is causing the
dysfunction is
you know it's not just the fact of the
screens but it's what they imply that
virtually everything that people know is
coming through a social channel right so
it is all open to manipulation
augmentation distortion
and
what people generally do not pick up in
the normal course of an education even
what we consider to be a high quality
education
is interaction with systems that allow
you to check whether or not that which
sounds right actually comports with
logic
so for example
if you interact with
an engine you can't fool an engine into
starting you either figure out why it
isn't starting or you don't and so we
advocated for students that they
dedicate some large fraction of their
education to systems that are not
socially mediated in which success or
failure is dictated by a physical system
that tells you whether or not you've
understood or failed to understand
and i mean this can be mechanics or
carpentry but it also can be you know
baking frankly or learning to play the
guitar right or or parkour anything
where success or failure is
non-arbitrary what you don't want is an
education built entirely of i succeeded
when the person at the front of the room
told me i got it because if the person
at the front of the room is a dope which
unfortunately happens too often you may
pick up wrong ideas and feel rewarded
for believing in them and that can
result in tremendous confusion
i would just finally say
that the book really
is about what we have informally called
an evolutionary toolkit and that
evolutionary toolkit the beauty of it
what we saw and what students reported
to us in their picking it up
that toolkit allows with a very small
set of assumptions the understanding of
a large
fraction of the phenomena that we care
about almost everything we care about as
humans is evolutionarily impacted
and the ability to go through what you
are told about
your psychology or your teeth or
anything like that and say does that
make sense given the highest quality
darwinism that we've got does it make
sense to be told that our genomes
suddenly went haywire and that's why an
ever-increasing fraction of young people
need orthodontia
nope not for a moment does it make sense
that we have a
piece of our
intestine called the appendix that is no
longer of any value and yet a huge
number of people have uh this thing
become inflamed and burst so that their
lives are placed in jeopardy nope it
does not the ability to check what
you're being told against a set of law a
a toolkit for logic that is so robust
that you can instantly spot nonsense is
a very powerful enhancement and it does
not involve knowing more
it involves knowing less and having that
little bit that you know be really
robust that's terrific i would just say
it doesn't necessarily involve you
knowing less but being certain of less
it requires that you rest what you know
on less the foundation is more robust
and uh less elaborate i was just about
to ask what it means to know less so
thank you for that
um yeah that is
very interesting when i think about i
forget the exact quote but as the island
of your knowledge grows the shore of
your ignorance grows too you know
whatever the the famous quote but
it's a really interesting dichotomy so
all right we've got this generation
that's growing up they're looking at
screens you guys make a pretty
interesting assertion in the book about
what screens do in terms of you're
getting emotional cues from a non-human
entity and that it may play a part in
the rise in autism i found that
incredibly interesting
what i want to better understand is
what's going on
in our brains that so helicopter
parenting or snowplow parenting for
instance like why does that trap us in a
perpetual childhood you guys talk about
rites of passage in the book i'd be very
curious to to hear like
how do we begin to deal with some of
these things whether it's screens
whether it's snow pub parenting you know
if i find myself a 19 year old and i
realize i've been done dirty i've been
on drugs for ages i was raised
essentially by a screen i'm you know
having trouble connecting having trouble
relating and my parents have taken care
of everything for me
what are the symptoms i need to look out
for and then how do i push forward
well uh in terms of symptoms this is
more or less
a uh
it's a self-diagnosing problem you
either
none of us feel perfectly at home in
modernity because in fact we are not at
home we can't be
even you know the the world that we live
in is not the world of our grandparents
it's not even the world that we were
born into we live as adults in the world
that
just literally didn't exist when we were
born and it's not the world even that
our children are born into unless they
were literally born yesterday
right exactly it's changing so fast it
can't be but that said you either are
feeling constantly confused about what
you're seeing and hearing and you don't
know what to think or you've found
something that allows you
to move forward and even if you can't
fully manage what it is you're
confronting it should surprise you less
and less and so
we provide a couple of tools in the book
we talk about the precautionary
principle and we talk about chesterton's
fence which are really two sides of the
same coin
and if your life has been built around
the idea that whatever the newest thing
is the you know the latest wisdom is
what you uh were brought up on then in
all likelihood you are
you know taking various drugs to correct
for various things which may very well
be the symptoms of the last drugs you
you took uh you you know you may be
engaging in all kinds of behaviors
to fix mysterious problems maybe you
can't sleep and you know so
you're uh taking some aggressive
mechanism to deal with that the basic
point is
back away from that which is novel and
untested and in the direction of that
which is time tested and it will result
in a
decrease in anxiety an increase in your
control over your own life and the way
you'll tell is that you will feel less
confused more of the time
can you guys define chesterton's fence i
thought that was a really great part of
the book
yeah um so gk chesterton was a 20th
century
political philosopher maybe i'm not sure
exactly how he would have defined
himself but um of of the many
contributions that he made
to you know i think he was a
conservative
but of one of the many contributions
that he made was imagining two people on
a walk together and coming across a
fence
that appeared to be on their way and
person a says let's get rid of the fence
and person b says well what's it here
for person a says i don't care it
doesn't matter i just want it gone
and person b or chesterton i suppose in
my telling here says there's no way that
i should let you get rid of the fence
until and unless you can tell me what
its function is if you can tell me what
its function is or was originally here
for
then maybe we can talk about whether or
not it's time for it to go but until you
can explain to me what the function is
or was then there's no way that i should
allow you to get rid of it simply
because you see it as an inconvenience
so
you know the appendix that brett already
mentioned
is is a perfect example of this and we
talk about in the book things like you
know chesterton's breast milk you know
we should you know we should we should
be abandoning breastfeeding um you know
we are abandoning breastfeeding to the
degree that we're doing so at our peril
uh chesterton's play not letting
children have long periods of
unstructured play in which adults are
not monitoring them and are not telling
them not to bully each other even though
bullying is bad yes but allowing
children to figure out for themselves in
mixed age groups how it is to navigate
risk themselves
that is how those children will grow
into competent young people and you know
if you do arrive at 19 having been
drugged into submission and having had
your parents clear all of the hazards
out of the way for you
the thing you can do is start exposing
yourself to risk and
risk is risky you know um this is you
know this is both a tautology and also
shocking to people because you know wait
you're telling me i need to expose my
children to risk
well if you want to guarantee that your
child will make it to their 18th
birthday alive then sure put them in a
cocoon right that's the way to make sure
that their body will get to 18
is to reduce all risk from their lives
and protect them from everything but
will they have the mind of an 18 year
old at that point no they will not
so you trade a little bit of security
that your child will survive and
you know every time i say anything like
that i get chills you know we have
children they're teenagers now and the
idea that one of them would die and that
they would die taking a risk that we had
implicitly or explicitly encouraged i
don't know how you go on right and your
parents do but i don't know how you go
on
but the bigger risk is that they get to
18 and they're incompetent and that they
can't think and they don't know how to
navigate the world especially now where
the world and the future will look
nothing like it did in the past they
need to be able to problem solve and the
way to do that is to be exposed to as
many situations in which they are
navigating on their own as early as
possible selection has really
given uh parents a
the job of both managing risk and not
fully managing risk in other words it's
not that you don't protect your children
but you want to protect them at a level
where they do make mistakes and those
mistakes do come back to haunt them and
it causes them to be wise adults who are
capable of managing
risk when the risks when the stakes are
much higher
and that's really the question it's not
do you want your child to be safe of
course you do but you want them to be
safe across their entire life and if you
protect them too much when they are
young they will not be able to do it
when they are older and the risks are
frankly much larger
yeah one of the things that i find most
intoxicating about you guys your book
your podcast is nuance
complexity like recognizing that by
being reductionist by boiling things
down to you know make them simple but no
no further whatever the quote is that
there is a point at which you can reduce
something so far that you lose what's
really going on
and finding our way through all of this
complexity though is incredibly
difficult
so as it comes to your own parenting
style how have you guys employed this
the idea that i'm most interested of
yours is is the idea that the magic
happens in the friction so whether it's
male female whether it's right left it's
understanding or safety and risk it's
understanding that it's either side is
problematic
how have you guys navigated that
complexity
well we
gambled with neither of us knew
particularly much about
rearing children at the point where we
ended up with them and
we
more or less gambled on the other
surprise to me at the point that we
ended up with them no no that carried
them for three months no no certainly we
knew they were coming for many months
but um but from the point of view of
what one does to raise children well
we hadn't had a lot of experience with
young kids they just hadn't been in our
lives and we gambled on an idea that i
still think it's not entirely obvious
why it works at all
but if you
treat your children
more or less at least cognitively you
just shoot way over their heads right
you talk to them like like adults from
very early on
and
they cannot respond in kind but they get
much more than you would think based on
what they can say in response and so we
have been extremely open with our
children about the hazards in the world
that they face and the hazards in our
family have been
frankly greater than than most children
would be confronted with at least in the
weird world now um we have been honest
with them we you know we have an
explicit rule in our household and the
children could recite it uh
without thought right you are allowed to
break your arm or your leg you are not
allowed to damage your eyes you're not
allowed to damage your skull you're not
allowed to damage your neck or your back
right now when you say that to a kid
and they realize actually it's not that
i'm being told no no no no no i'm being
told i am actually allowed to break my
arm and nobody is going to necessarily
you know be concerned you know yes
we'll take care of you no matter what
and if you damage your eyes we'll take
care of you then too but the basic point
is there's just a fundamental
distinction between damaging things
which repair pretty well and damaging
things which don't and that ought to
exist in your mind you know every time
you leave the house understanding that
there are certain things you know that
it's not that you want to avoid bad
things
and uh go towards good things it's that
there's a whole spectrum of bad and uh
you may need in an instant to navigate
you know if you're driving down the
highway
yes the first job is don't crash
right don't crash is a good rule but you
can't always not crash and sometimes
you've got a choice about what you crash
into or how you crash and you know if
you've just got everything filed as a
binary then
you're you're in much more danger so
being clear with kids about the
subtleties and the nuance and frankly
about the bind that you're in our
children know
that we have made a conscious decision
that in order that they can manage risk
as adults they have to face risks as
children that
could potentially cost them their lives
you know we took our kids into the
amazon for example that's not a safe
place to be but they're also the kind of
kids who can handle it now so one of the
things
that was very important to us was that
our children literally learn how to fall
that when they were climbing up on
things on trees or in jungle gyms
that they would launch themselves
intentionally so they would learn how to
fall safely but metaphorically learning
how to fall is the other thing that you
learn once you are engaged in literally
learning how to fall and maybe maybe
that is the kind of risk that we are in
fact trying to prepare our children for
and that we are arguing that parents
everywhere should be preparing their
children for how to fall safely so that
you get up and can live to
maybe not fall again but if you do fall
again live to get up again another day
yeah actually it occurs to me right now
that engineers
know this backwards and forwards right
fail safe that's what you want a system
that fails safely and um building that
into your kids is is an essential and
essential skill
so one of the things you talked about in
the book that i was like whoa was when
your son broke his arm i think he was
older because i know when the once broke
it going down the stairs that one
required immediate medical attention
but there was a time where he broke his
arm and it was like a couple days i
think before you actually went and had
it looked at
um
and there's like an actual principle
behind strengthening the bone that you
guys go through and i was
very impressed um talk about that
including the notion that as this is
like
you guys have overcome one of the
reasons that i didn't become a father
was it seemed so self-evident to me that
you had to do things like let your kids
take risks you know within confines that
you had to make things hard for them
within confines uh and i wasn't sure
that i would enjoy that process so it
was obvious i would have to do it and
not obvious that i would enjoy it and
when you guys talked about like how we
sort of over cuddle things which i could
immediately
empathize with i get why people do it
why you want to wrap a broken arm in the
thickest cast you can possibly find but
that even that
isn't always the right answer
yeah no it's really not that we our
brains are anti-fragile and our bones
are anti-fragile and they they become
stronger with stressors
and
society seems to be imagining that what
we all are is fragile and by imagining
that we're fragile by creating
conditions that imagine that we're
fragile that becomes the reality we
become more and more fragile and less
anti-fragile so uh in the case of our
our older son or it was our younger son
but when he was older
who broke his arm in the last day of
camp we did get him to um to an
emergency room that day it was several
hours but it was that day
and they told us that at the point that
we got back home to portland which was
um a several several hour drive and it
was going to be many days before we got
there that we should go see an
orthopedist and to have a calf put on to
have a cast put on so we spent several
days um splinted he split he spent
several days splinted and with some uh
with some pain medication
before we ended up going home to
portland and where we did not get a cast
but the important thing is this is not
an experiment we were ran on our child
before i had run it on myself
right so
um evolutionarily speaking
uh there is a logic to
what one does with broken bones and it's
a very different logic lots of creatures
don't heal so well horses famously don't
heal very well and the reason for this
is fairly obvious a horse a wild
ancestral horse that had a broken limb
wasn't going to recover that is to say
once an animal was hobbled by a broken
limb it was going to be picked off by a
predator so the selection that creates
the capacity to repair wasn't there on
the other hand
sloths which fall out of trees fairly
regularly but don't depend on their
ability to get away from predators
through speed actually survive very
frequently and when we look at sloth
carcasses they very regularly have
breaks that have healed so creatures
that can heal have that capacity our
arms and humans are such creatures we
are such creatures so one wants to be
very careful right if a bone is
misaligned you then want to utilize
medicine in order to get the healing
process to work correctly so it doesn't
heal in a misaligned way but if you've
got a fracture and you haven't
misaligned something there's a whole
other logic that takes over immobilizing
the arm isn't what we're built for in
fact what you're built for is to have
pain and inflammation
do the job and the result when i broke
my arm and i just said you know what
i've thought for my whole life why is it
that we rush to get a doctor to um to
immobilize this and then we atrophy and
have it removed and we have to rebuild
our strength maybe that's not how it's
supposed to be logically evolution has
prepared us for this let's see what
happens
when i broke my arm and i was certain
that it was not misaligned and i let it
go
what i found out
was a one has to be very careful for the
first day or two until you learn what it
is that you're capable of doing but your
capacity begins to return very very
quickly and the degree to which i was
better off the time that i broke my arm
that i fractured my arm and did nothing
medical than the time that i fractured
my arm and did the standard medical
thing and had the cast
was night and day different and the fact
is
we talked to toby our younger son when
he broke his arm and we told him what we
were thinking and he had watched me go
through the experiment and he elected to
go through it himself and lo and behold
the same logic applied in his case
yeah that's really interesting and feels
like there's a lot that we can
extrapolate from that in terms of our
real lives
one idea that i find really enticing and
i'm sad that i didn't go through it when
i was a kid our rites of passage do you
guys think about that
all the time
we have dispensed so this is a classic
chesterton's fence issue where it used
to be that there were these you know
hallmarks of having passed through a
certain developmental state and at some
point i think people started to feel
that these things were
primitive
and they dispensed with all of them and
much to our peril because it you know
what you are is a creature
that starts out utterly helpless and
ends up incredibly capable but there are
moments at which you take on
new responsibility right now it's
arbitrary is an 18 year old really an
adult in many ways yes in some ways no
it's not really a moment at which you
become an adult but you do need a moment
at which we say actually
at this point
these responsibilities are ones we
believe you can handle and going forward
that's what they are and the ceremony
itself instantiates it the ceremony
helps make it real and maybe it's at 18
maybe it's at 15 maybe it's at 13
depending on the tradition maybe it's
counting in a different way in cases um
where perhaps the adherence to the
calendar is not the thing but you know
the moment now you are a man now you are
a woman
is
has got to be an empowering one and it's
one of the things that is almost
universally lost for us us weird people
and you know it may well be the case
just as is the case with something like
follow-through in sport what you do
after you hit the ball actually does not
matter but it is very important that you
intend to follow through
and in that same way going through your
life knowing that at this moment i'm
going to be expected to do this thing
whether it's a vision quest or or
whatever it may be
knowing that that moment is coming and
that on the far side of it you will be a
different person is a developmental
process in and of itself so it's very
likely the thing that happens as you
anticipate this uh rite of passage that
is really the important developmental
thing but we've just
dispensed with them all
so we've talked a lot about uh
evolution and all the different things
and ways that it manifests in our life
and i want to bring now people back to
where we started in the book that
you know we're we're at
if if instead of a nuclear clock coming
towards 12 you guys would say that from
just a societal uh standpoint we're
edging up somewhere in there
um
talk to us about the fourth frontier but
to understand the fourth frontier i
think we have to understand the first
three frontiers
so if you can walk us through that it
was a really interesting idea it was the
part of your book that i had to read
twice
because i was like whoa there's really
something fascinating here and it it
hints at a very complex answer to a very
complex problem
uh was entirely novel for me i've never
heard this idea explored before and i
think that it'll be
really helpful for people to see
uh that you've thought not just through
the problem but through potential
solutions
well the first thing to realize is that
all evolved creatures are effectively in
a search for opportunity
and that
opportunity looks like
for an average creature under average
circumstances if it's a sexually
reproducing creature the average number
of offspring that it will produce that
reaches reproductive maturity themselves
will be two it doesn't matter if they
produce a hundred babies or three the
average that will reach that number is
two and the reason is because the
population isn't growing or contracting
so two parents will end up replacing
themselves and know better at least on
average
when you have succeeded evolutionarily
you find some opportunity that allows
that rule to be broken right uh a
creature that passes over a mountain
pass and ends up in a valley in which it
has no competitors may leave a hundred
times as many offspring as it would have
if it had remained in its initial
habitat and so these places where
creatures discover an unexploited or
underexploited opportunity and their
population can grow are frontiers and
the
feeling of growth is the feeling of
evolutionary success the problem is all
of these things are limited right no
matter what opportunity you've found
the population will grow until that
opportunity is no longer underexploited
at which point the zero-sum dynamics
will be restored but let's just lay out
the the first three types of frontier
before perhaps you um you expand on what
the fourth frontier is so um the the
first type of frontier being the one
that most people think of when you hear
the word when they hear the word
frontier which is a geographic frontier
so we begin the book by talking about
the beringians the first americans who
came over
from through beringia across what is now
the bering strait from asia into the new
world something between 10 and 25 000
years ago
they were coming into two continents
that had never before been inhabited by
humans and that was a vast geographic
frontier
the second type of frontier
might be called a technological frontier
in which you innovate something that
allows you to make use of resource uh
that you heretofore had not had access
to so for instance the terracing of
hillsides to allow water to be held and
agricultural systems to be to be done
where previously all the water would
have run off taking the nutrients in the
water
with it that would be an example of a
technological frontier
and then the third type of frontier
which is ubiquitous throughout human
history
is a transfer of resource frontier and
this is really not a frontier it's it's
just it's theft right and so
uh the beringians coming into the new
world uh for the first time again 10 to
25 000 years ago we're experiencing a
geographic frontier thousands of years
later when europeans came to the new
world from the other direction from from
the east
they landed in a space that already had
tens of millions of people in it
and basically took over and that was a
transfer of resource moment and a
transfer of resource frontier basically
theft so
geographic frontiers and technological
frontiers are not inherently theft
transfer of resource is and so we are
proposing a fourth frontier so i just
say uh transfer of resource is the
explanation for almost all wars and
genocide from the point of view of some
population the resources of some other
population that cannot be defended are
as if a frontier but the idea of the
overarching idea is that all creatures
are seeking these non-zero sum
opportunities that they are experienced
as growth
that they are
inherently self-destabilizing that they
cause the growth of populations that
then restores the zero-sum dynamics
restores the austerity which doesn't
feel so good and the population is then
in the search for the next non-zero-sum
growth frontier
the problem is
we can't keep doing that right that
process made us what we are and we've
been tremendously successful at it but
there are no more tech uh geographic
frontiers on earth we've found it all
technologically we've done an excellent
job of figuring out how to exploit the
world in fact over exploit the world
transfer resource is a world
destabilizing not only is it a
despicable process but it is a lethal
process from the point of view of the
danger it puts us at we simply have
weaponry that is too powerful we are too
interconnected and so in a sense our
fates are all now linked and we have to
agree to
put that uh competition aside and then
the question is well what do we do do we
face
do we accept the zero-sum dynamics and
live with austerity that doesn't sound
like
a very good sales pitch even even if it
was what we had to do
so what we propose in the book is that
there's actually an alternative to this
that one
can produce a steady state
that feels like growth to the people who
experience it without having to discover
new resource
and that may sound preposterous it may
sound utopian we are not utopians we
regard utopia as the worst idea human
beings ever had or at least very close
to the top of that list
but there's nothing uh undoable about a
system that feels like perpetual growth
in the same way
there is nothing utopian about the idea
that it's always springtime inside your
house
right it's always pleasant inside your
house that's not a violation of any
physical law
it's just a simple matter of the fact
that we can use energy to modulate the
temperature with a negative feedback
system and we can keep it very pleasant
in your house all the time and the point
is can that be done
in our larger environment such that
human beings are liberated to do the
things that we are
uniquely positioned to do to generate
beauty to experience love to feel
compassion to
enhance our understanding of the world
all of those things are the kinds of
things that are worthy of us as an
objective
and what we need in order for more
people to spend their time pursuing
those things is a system in which we are
freed from competing one lineage against
the others
uh for a limited amount of resources and
and the
uh so that you know we are condemned to
violence against each other in order to
pursue these things so in essence the
fourth frontier is a steady state
designed to liberate
people
we should say it is not something we
believe we can blueprint from here we
know enough to navigate our way in that
direction
but we cannot blueprint it it is
something we will have to prototype and
navigate to
but the good news is
although
we here probably would not live to see
the final product
things would start getting better
immediately upon our recognition that
pursuing the fourth frontier was the
right thing to do
that suddenly there would be a
tremendous amount of useful work to be
done in discovering what the various
mechanisms of that new way of being are
all right you guys are going to have to
give me a little more than that in the
book you talk about you give an example
and it was the thing that really
allowed me to begin to understand
how we could achieve a steady state that
gave us those things um
i don't know if you remember the example
that you gave in the book i do so if you
don't let me know and i will refresh
your memory but i'm talking about the
mayans is that right in the book you
specifically talk about craftsmanship
but if you've got something for me on
the minds i'll take it yeah well i mean
we i think we do we do both right um
and
uh let's see well maybe maybe remind us
of exactly what we say about
craftsmanship i remember that we talk
about it but i'm not sure exactly what
the context is here the idea was
basically that so we have this inherent
desire for
growth but it isn't necessarily growth
itself it's sort of now i'm using my own
words it's the neurochemical state of
feeling this deep sense of satisfaction
at having
something of import is probably the the
easiest way to think of it and that gave
me something to grasp onto because i so
i often get asked the question i've had
financial success in my life and the
irony of my life is that i'm constantly
going around trying to convince people
that money is not going to do for you
what you think it will it's very
powerful but it isn't what most people
think they think it will make them feel
better about themselves and money is
just absolutely incapable of doing that
and so when you realize the only thing
that matters is how you feel about
yourself you start playing a game of
neurochemistry and so this idea of
craftsmanship felt like that to me yeah
so you know recognizing
the long-term
hormonal glow that you get
from producing something of lasting
value and beauty and meaning in the
world
as opposed to only being exposed to
short-term stuff you know the difference
between
buying something at ikea and putting it
together with allen wrenches on your
floor and of either making yourself or
coming to know a craftsman who
really builds things with care and
knowledge with the intention that you
will be able to pass this on to your
children or your friends or whomever
later on this is a piece
with with lasting beauty lasting
function that was built with someone who
knew something about the wood or the
metals or whatever the materials are
this is a way in to finding the kinds of
meaning that a fourth frontier mentality
can provide yeah i think
the distinction is one between
um the satisfaction of life coming from
consuming which is inherently empty
versus uh producing and producing
doesn't necessarily have to mean stuff
it can be meaning or insight or any one
of a number of other things but what we
say about the the maya in the book what
we argue
is that they very conspicuously this is
an extremely long-lived civilization
um thousands of years of remarkable
success
and they had uh as one of the things
that they produced in all of their
city-states they produced these
incredible
monuments which are actually not what
they appear to be we have spent a lot of
time in uh in mayan territory and these
things look like pyramids in the sense
that the egyptians produce them but they
are not they are in fact growing
structures so these things got bigger
and bigger over time the longer a
city-state existed in the same place and
then there's the hidden version of this
which are an incredible network of roads
stone roads that exist between the
city-states called sock bays
in any case the point is the maya were
producing
things
that stood in for population growth they
were taking some fraction of their
productivity and they were dedicating it
to these massive public works projects
and the thing about a massive public
works project is that it brings a kind
of reality and cohesion to the people
involved i mean imagine yourself
living in one of these amazing cities
and the public monuments made of stone
that speak to the power and the
durability of your people are you know
part of this uh this public space
these things
allow the following process if it's not
just a pyramid that you you know you
it's a line item on a budget you build
the pyramid it's done but in fact what
you do is you augment it well then in
good years
you will have that to augment and you
will take some fraction of the
productivity that might be turned into
more people which would then result in
more austerity you can invest it in
these public works project and then in a
lean year instead of having not enough
to go and feed all of the mouths that
have been created you can just simply
not augment the
public works project that is a natural
damper for the kind of ebb and flow the
boom and bust that we have suffered so
mightily under under our modern economic
systems so
the production of meaning the production
of uh
shared space that actually augments the
ability of people to interact with each
other
these things are models of what we
should probably be seeking as a society
a system that tamps down the
fluctuations that provides liberty to
people that's really the key thing right
we want realized liberty for individuals
that they can pursue
what is meaningful rather than
satisfying themselves with consumption
that's sort of a rough outline of what a
fourth frontier would look like
nice i love it um in the book i can't
remember if it was liberty that you were
talking about specifically but you talk
about it's an emergent property i assume
you mean the same with liberty
how do we create the bed from which
liberty will emerge
well what we argue in the book is that
liberty is a special value and the
reason that is a special value is
there really two ways to to delineate it
you can be technically free but not
really free right if you're concerned
about being wiped out by a health care
crisis or you're concerned that you you
may lose your job and have to find
another in a different industry you're
not really free even if technically you
could go out and start an oil company
it's not going to happen so
what we argue is that real liberty
realized liberty is liberty you can act
on
and
in order for a person to be liberated
their more mundane concerns their safety
their sustenance all those things have
to be taken care of and therefore we can
know that we have succeeded when
somebody has real liberty that they are
capable of acting on it's a proxy
and
what we argue is that the objective
ought to be to provide real liberty for
as many people as possible hopefully
ultimately everyone would be liberated
to do something truly remarkable rather
than only elites having that freedom
i guess i would just say um
as as high a fraction of the population
as possible uh if we say as many people
as possible it might sound like we're
also interested in maximizing population
growth and of course
you know of course we're not you know i
think we will peak hopefully at some
point soon
and then population may start going down
through attrition but that at every
moment in uh in human history going
forward um the
vast number of the greatest number of
people possible who have maximal liberty
will be a success
and let me just uh
refine that slightly
the objective is the maximum number of
liberated people but not living
simultaneously ultimately the way to
grant the marvelous liberated life to
the maximum number of people is to get
sustainable at the level that humans can
live indefinitely on the planet rather
than having a clock ticking where we
just simply don't have the resources to
continue doing what we're doing
i love it guys thank you so much for
coming on the show today the book was
phenomenal your podcast is phenomenal
every moment i've ever got to spend with
you guys has been absolutely wonderful
where do you want people to follow along
with you where's the best place to get
the book
well that's a that's a question we
should have an answer to yeah
the best place to get the book is
hopefully just about anywhere um you
know it's obviously available
on the big big sellers like amazon and
barnes and noble but i know it's
available in many independent bookshops
as well and
i'm a big fan of independent bookstores
so if if you ask for it there whatever
your favorite one is that's probably a a
terrific move to help to help support
your local economy it will also be
available as an audio book which we read
yup that's absolutely true and you can
find us
at uh the dark horse podcast we do
weekly live streams uh the two of us and
brett also has guests on um
every now and again uh i also am doing a
newsletter called natural selections you
can find that on
naturalselections.substance.com
and
yeah maybe maybe that
that sounds perfect guys thanks again
for joining me this was absolutely
wonderful and to everybody out there
trust me when i say the book is amazing
the podcast is extraordinary you guys
will love it so be sure to subscribe
there and speaking of places you should
you should subscribe if you haven't
already hit that subscription button
there and until next time my friends be
legendary take care peace
[Music]
you